Practices of Digital resilience and permacomputing

translocal people's club pipas(?)

- habdo
	privilege and responsibility to be critical, rewild technology, embrace tensions

- lukas
	> correspondence.works
	functional alternatives + aesthetic dimension (how they look, how they feel)
	> The temporary autonomous zone, Hakim Bey, 1991 - a collectively run space negotiated and mantained by a group of people (e.g. squats), microrevolts
	> Transcoding the digital: how metaphors matter in new media, marianne van den boomen, 2015 - language used for digital technology (helps understanding complex concepts but it's not neutral)
	> a feminist server manifesto
	self-host as a repsonse to the issue of ownership?!
	> myold.computer
	these things probably dont solve anything (servers not a longterm solution), the value is in the language that we develop to scrutinize these problems, its about testing out these things

- ola
	> olabonati.com
	materiality / nonmateriality, politics of design (looking past the surface of devices and infrastructure), whacky visions of tech futures, prermacomputing principles
	data walk in science park and flevopark: pollutes landscape with data centers
	> acid clouds, niels schrader - resource-intensive and earthbound properties of data centers
	maximalism / minimalism
	accelerationist's vision of the future
	> controlwars.org - + permacomputing principles

- brendan howell & michal klodner
	> wintermute.org
	rustic computing
	brendan: artist and reluctant engineer, early studies were in engineering but smthing smelled off, engineering as a practice is desistent to dark stuff(?), media art is also complicit in engagin in tech maximalism aesthetics
	> staying with the trouble
	different approach in networking, networking with a plant, engaged with technique but in contact with nature, artificial landscape in background

- habdo
	theres almost a shared desire of finding alternatives
	what is a good alternative? idfferent portrayal of alternatives 
	to begin proposing alternatives we have to understand what we have at hand (cultures of use, computational machinery, mechanism of concealment)
	how can we sustainably propose alternatives that free us from monolithic big tech
	> node9.org
	field guide for practice

- marloes
	a tale of two datacenters
	why these alternatives matter so much?
	> the hmm
	talks about data center in a polder, map from 1658, wiringermeerpolder (1940) ready for use. 1944 nazis blew up the dyke, the polder was inundated but then was dry again
	they were hotbanks, they made 3 equally sized villages, small agrarian, agriculture main activity.
	2005: farmlands transformed into construction lots. agriport
	2006: ecwenergy was created, cause to heat greenhouses ecwenergy.nl/elektra
	duijves, P bits&bytes and ... paprika, parthenon data centre
	> microsoft - biomimicry for blending data centers in landscape
	secrecy was broken, then public negative opinion, in 2024 there will be data long overdue
	> bleu255.com(?) /damaged(?)

- habdo
	comedy of error, places the consumer in the face of extractive practices

- michal klodner
	> node9.lab
	forest care and permacomputing
	varia little tech library server, solar powered low-tech magazine
	> pimoroni.com, enviro+, citizen science maps, raspberry 0, environm. sensors
	microclimate
	> Forest sorrow (2023), dir barbora klocova - deforestation by warming climate, in some countries desertification, spruce monoculture in unsuitable conditions, industrial forestry failure, slow intervention
	dense planting not enough light therefore no regrow of plant species
	> from a dry field to a lush food forest in 18 months, Youtube
	> livinglabs@node9.org
	> raspicam + liquidsoap stream, Odroid N2 server
	> Nikola Brabcova, waterlily tea performance
	> transmitting:debugging digital healing zine 2022
	care of information
	> Al Yakubouskaya, Reminiscence
	detach media art from urban contet, server farm processing, fomo... reimagine rural social sustainability

- habdo
	swahili quote: doesnt matter if elephants are fighting or making love, the grass suffers - promise of the alternative but ateodd landscape suffers
	- marloes: 
		freedom of information act request provided the sources for data + local politicians who invited media attention. breaking the silence was going to backfire. Blades of grass can do something: local journalism and activism
	the moment it becomes public the whole equation changes, you cant fight something you cant see
	- marloes:
		alternatives need to be visible as well
	resilience, what were your learning about digital resilience?
	- michal:
		making a balance between tech and mining sources & nature system. how to intervene in a natural system to extract information without "stepping on the grass" [resilience as resistance of system to disruptive interventions]
	ethics of care? giving up convenience for sustainability
	how does residual heating work?
	- marloes:
		nl needs greenhouses, gas turbines for sustaining, massive surplus, >tenet, sold to the data centers
	invitations: try and understand underlying principles in both research & what kind of things you can take in your own work
	
- raaf (unbinare)
	poverty and praxis, anarchist, hacker, reverse engineer
	Unbinare, reverse engineering lab, reduce increasing of ewaste through reverse engineering
	planned obsolescence, inability to repair devices, abandonment of software support
	what is e-waste? electronic waste. global ewaste statistics.
	curiosity and inquisiveness, no such thing as illegal knowledge (anarchism)
	problem with peer-review, highly educated specialists review highly educated specialists
	poverty or absence of prosperity in social-and-economic conditions
	> unbinare.be
	> OOISTER
	overcoming limitations where there is a hierarchy of dominance, commons we have lost
	ecological problems are deeply humanitarian and interpersonal not technological
	informal sector is activity done at will without any form of control by the broader industry at large. not formal sector.
	local >> global, small scale >> large scale
	externalizing agency
	poverty exposes dynamics of privilege
	lack of independent disposition to tech recurseive mechanism
	experience of poverty informs design of tools ++++++
	unconventional design, rejected in academic context, for poverty in solidarity

- danny (varia)
	varia is a collective of 13 people, lot work in art design education, software dev, sysadmins, sushi chef, musicians
	collective approaches to everyday technology
	non-hierarchical, no board, no president, decisions are slower but horizontal
	technological dichotomies: smart/dumb, old/new, low/high
	notions: conditions, frugality, accessibility, transformability, public interest
	common technology: website. not different from data center just different way
	formulate critical attitudes and transform them into action by explicitly engaging with technologies; action is more important than theory;
	> look at phone pic for what they host
	producing piece of software + idea of care that the software needs to be reliable for those participating in it; not experimenting on parts that needs to be reliable
	collective approaches: form and maintain a network of practitioners through which we can support each other's practice
	> alert.org (network is vaster than just varia)
	provide a space for long-term, sustainable, critical, artistic, ands-on, dialogical learning about everyday technology;
	dialogical learning! (?)
	how to figure things out? try keep notes
	> push to talk partyline; 
		information bike lane; license free radio as a low-power medium for keeping in touch with each other; 
		varia as a space is crucial for 1.range of pmr-radio, other local radio broadcasts, a place to recover; 
		organic growth of a technology, if people want to communicate they need two devices
	> plaintext partylines;
		plaintext as a design tool, medium, culture, and methodological constraing
		understanding plaintext as a possible tool for computational degroth in online communication requires a great deal of prior knowledge
		bloated js on a website is an issue on your power consumption but it's not easy to get this prior knowledge
		working with plaintext as a design tool is meticulous work that takes up a lot of time: [UNLEARNING]
		varia work requires a lot of time for learning: progress is slower, reach is different yet limited, collective space allows to resist having to conform to certain standards of time
	> octomode: collective editing space for pdf making; ateodd is just a combination of free software tools
	> SomeTimes
	> traversal network of feminist servers


- ???
	lot of common ground. focus on collectivity and solidarity, also deeply anarchic approach which tackles the issue of ownership. permaculture has open knowledge way. How would you relate to an anarchist perspective? Education?
	- danny
		only with anarchist principles u can do education properly. There's no need to be quick and monetizing time, only then you have time to properly explain what is required to get to some semblance of permacomputing. stop equating time and money
	- raff
		solidarity, ? to action, running from a basis of empathy and otgetherness and equality, we are not islands, the more we are in dialogue, the more we give each other space the more we are able to express individual idioysncrasis and interact with one another for common benefit
	how did u build ghana network?
	- raff
		2021, e-waste world conference in frankfurt. Lot og gov agencies talking about AI vision techniques for finding working electronics in waste streams, or mgmt processes. How to extract "value". There were a few hackers in ghana with hacker spaces
	audrey lorde, master tools cannot dismantle the master's house. what are your methods for making new tools?
	- danny
		i work from my own perspective first, digital accessibility is very important. practical problemsolving, what is the least wasteful way to address that problem?
		> contrast checker
	- raff
		limited budget: constraint
		start without any existing tool available. repetitive process, any tool we happen to improvise we modify it and eventually the tool itself will dictate that it needs to be designed
		the we is small distributed spaces, online collabs
	necessity is mother of invention, poverty gives a perspective on a system which is not just a disadvantage but a creative space. how do we celebrate poverty?
	- raff
		i dont desire to have more resources!
		limitation inherited to poverty provides spaces that are not existing outside of poverty. freedom from coercion, from financial pressure. we all dont need it.
	- danny
		second this position of not desiring more ressources. the services we provide do not desire the same resources as big tech. do not require those. system can be down is sometimes ok, we re not always available.

- ???
	marie verdeil
	> marie@verdeil.net, @marie_verdeil, @marieverdeil@post.lurk.org
	q: how u got started in permacomputing/low-impact design? inspiration and knowledge?
		a: out of eco-anxiety, exploring local power production, creating mediation tools to understand our energy consumption.
		did an internship at lowtech mag. energy is one of the big themes we explore.
		> solar.lowtechmagazine.com; kris de dekker
	q: to those who dont have a techy bg
		a: figuring out. bike generator. understand electricity and power, what energy is available and what not. what energy can u power by yourself?
	q: idea of how fast u need to cycle to charge ur phone?
		a: complicated question cause it depends. 
	exploring the internet and its infrastructure within limits: local scale, limited energy, reuse, physicality
	> what shape is the internet? noahveltman.com
	q: assumed everything was worse in the past, progress society, old feminism opened the scape for new knowledge
	immersive humbling low-to-the-ground, subjective camera angle
		a: anti-manual? what are the principles of currymaking
	> plantenna (2022)
	> signal theremin
	> cantenna
		a: 95% now. 99% takes more resources than it's worth it. not about questioning reliability. reliability is doing what you say it's doing. expectation design
	q: its more about integrity. inspiration from people living off grid?
		a: choose a subculture and study: preppers subculture (people living off-the-grid). post apocalyptic, u get acquainted on negative thought. design of collaborativeness.
	q: how do u relate to the term permacomputing
		a: very recently acquainted to it but resonates with things i try to practice. permaculture is understanding of ecosystems from broader view, dependencies, power dynamics and care. very necessary critical approach (low-tech is subjective, what is low and what is high)

- sunjoo lee
	gardening as electricity making, redesigning human tools that could be used by more-than-human to give us other ways to look; wild life and prototyping-at-the-field
	> Tree-001 (with seo kim, timm donke); tree-001.com: livestreaming a tree for its lifetime on a website. lifetime of the tree, lifetime of the internet
	what is a network that is in sync with the tree's life? *what is more compatible with the tree and more earthly?
	generating electricity from mud?!?!?! power generating mudcells
	> earth battery; lemon battery: two different metals, galvanic cell
	microbial fuel cell: same material for anode and cathode, electrogenic bacteria meking electricity, bacteria break down soil and produce electrons
	shewanella and geobacteria
	mudcell collection as playful learning
	carbon felt / graphite felt : host for anaerobic bacteria to live. no corrosive material, stainless steel, bolt & nut. this is for anode and cathode
	different colors and structures. brewing mud batteries (like kombucha). you have to wait at least 2 days for electricity to be generated
	living beings in the mud jar, responsiblity as a generatress
	when i moved jars to exhibition space: temperature change, physically moved
BATTERY DYING - - - 
	> workshop at varia
	check pic on phone
	situated design (mud cells, can be off grid). understanding local system that enables powercells. makes u touch soils. requires intimate interaction with soil
	she wants to make an outdoor electricity-generating garden: q-
		design?
		selfsustaining?
		finding plants beneficial to electrogenic bacteria
		which containers to use
		power what? what kind o