What are next steps?

define research goal
	it's tied to artistic outcome and personal designer practice

prefiguring life after collapse or life as the meeting environmental goals

include current in the research

how do you make it prefigurative without making it post collapse
how do you reach more people (decentralised printing, lot of things over and over wiki markdown etc)
who are you talking to?
	curator of transmediale not interested in technology that my mother can use
	identify what kind of problems on solutions by those filter bubbles (think of long term and interoperability) what are the solutions they offer (intervention? hacking? 3d printing?) how can i translate those to another group of people, what does long term entail for a household?
ecologists shouldnt have cars (guilt tripping)
talk to people who know nothing about this, identify those things (is it attention? long term? interoperability?)
interoperability: example of hacker in brussels

what kind of other practices do they have? would you need philosophical or theoretical framework helps you systematize different practices. toolkits are practical toolkits or theoretical toolkits.

identify your audience!!

addiction feedback loop? invisible implication that these actions might have

cognitive engagement

not so much what can other public can get from permacomputing but what can permacomputing get from other people

drawing a map of systems and field

open information officer in a hospital
https://golb.statium.link/post/20230805-prefiguration/

jackson mclow - mapping out territories and organisations conceptual art of 60s-70s

drawing a map of group of thoughts and concepts and identify audience, here's all different topics and concepts and it kinda shows you which connections u see having found other people talking so much attention and data degrowth makes sense

what does the audience imagine and what do they do: talk to people (this is my dad and it informs permacomputing)

omg i spoke in prose this whole time

here all the concepts heres what im interested in and here are all the people im addressing and talking to

google scholar and i start this and i type "climate reader" take a look at table of contents, always ends up quoting giants in the field. skimming

Bill Mollison and david holmgren

computing there was a bit of military, a bit of research, a bit of business and companies, knowledge exchange (both by military and indigenous tribes)

permaculture and computing

code is law lawrence lessig, code 2.0
https://brycce.github.io/easyMPP/
https://lessig.org/product/codev2/

what are different things that influence digital economy (east coast code - law, west coast code - technical infrastructure, cultural practice, market forces)

tag all readings! tagging and skimming

economy climate and information, "umberto eco how to write a thesis" not being afraid of choosing too narrow a topic

things that you establish in your mind



